<!-- Página 1 -->

2020 IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering Workshops (ICSEW)

### An Exploratory

### Study

### on

### the

### Refactoring

### of

### Unit

### Test

### Files

### in

### Android Applications

### Anthony Peruma

### Christian D. Newman

### Mohamed Wiem Mkaouer

[axp6201@rit.edu](mailto:axp6201@rit.edu)[cnewman@se.rit.edu](mailto:cnewman@se.rit.edu)[mwmvse@rit.edu](mailto:mwmvse@rit.edu) Rochester Institute of Technologyofof Rochester, New York, USANewUSANewUSA

### Ali Ouni

### Fabio Palomba

[ali.ouni@etsmtl.ca](mailto:ali.ouni@etsmtl.ca)[fpalomba@unisa.it](mailto:fpalomba@unisa.it) ETS Montreal, University of QuebecSeSa Lab -of Salerno Montreal, Quebec, CanadaFisciano (SA), Italy

**1 INTRODUCTION****ABSTRACT** An essential activity of software maintenance is the refactoring ofModernsystems shield their production code with a qual- source code. Refactoring operations enable developers to take nec-ity gate, ensuring that proposed changes undergo several testing essary actions to correct bad programmingpractices (i.e., smells)strategies before being shippedto end-users.Therefore, just like in thesourcecodeofbothproductionandtestfiles.Withunitcode, any upgrade to software requirements would even- testing being a vital and fundamental part of ensuring the qualitytually trigger the evolutionof test code,it matchesthe of a system, developers must address smelly test code. In this pa-actual software behavior, and avoiding deprecation and decay22 ].[ per, we empiricallyexplore the impact and relationshipbetweenHence, test file designs must be of the highest quality in order to refactoring operations and test smells in 250 open-source Androidease their maintenance and evolution17[, 26 ]. The main threat to applications(apps). Our experiments showed that the type of refac-test files design, just like production code, is the existence of test toring operations performed by developers on test files differ fromsmells; symptoms of bad programming practices35[ Test smells those performed on non-test files. Further, results around test smellshave beenprovento threatenthe qualityof tests,makingthem show a co-occurrence between certain smell types and refactorings,harder to understand and to maintain by increasing their flakiness and how refactorings are utilized to eliminate smells. Findings from(i.e., tests that have a non-deterministicoutcome)25 [38 , 39, 49]. this study will not only further our knowledge of refactoring oper-Refactoring is one way to remove smells. In this context, refactor- ations on test files, but will also help developers in understandinging is a disciplinedsoftware engineeringpractice to improve the the possible ways on how to maintain their apps.internal design of software systems without altering its external behavior; itinvolveslocatingcodesmellsandtreatingthemas potential refactoring opportunities [23, 32].**CCS CONCEPTS** Although the refactoring of production code has been the sub- • Software and its engineering→evolution; Main- ject of several studies,we still noticea lack of investigationson **taining software.** whether and how developers typically refactor test code. Studying **KEYWORDS**refactoringpractices may be particularly interesting in the context Software maintenanceandevolution,Unittesting,Testsmells,of mobileapplications(apps),whicharetheprimarymeansfor Refactoring, Android applications.billionsof users to communicate and interact with external services and other people []. There are over 2.5 million apps on the Google **ACM** Play store (as of December2019)1 , []. As a matter of fact, it is Anthony Peruma, Christian D. Newman, MohamedWiem Mkaouer, Ali now, more than ever, essentialfor app developersto continually Ouni, and Fabio Palomba. 2020. An Exploratory Study on the Refactoring maintaintheir apps in order to reduce the risk of end-users switch-ofIEEE/ACMIn ing over to a competingapp24[ 37 ]. These apps, like traditionalConference systems, are alsosusceptibleto smellsin theirsourcecode,andSeoul,ACM, similarly,are impacted by the problems caused by bad smells19 ]. [10.1145/3387940.3392189 At present, little knowledge is available on the impact of refactoring activities on test smells present in the test files of Android apps. Permission In this paper, we initiate the research on refactoring test suites,classroom throughperforming an exploratory study on how developers refac-for ontor test code. In this work, we monitor the refactoring activities of must test files, belonging to 250 open-source Android apps. Our miningto fee.procedureallows us to determine the most frequent refactoring op- ICSEW’20,erations typically applied to test code, as well as the most frequent © 2020 refactoring operations applied to production code. Thus, allowingACM [https://doi.org/10.1145/3387940.3392189](https://doi.org/10.1145/3387940.3392189)

350


---

<!-- Página 2 -->

ICSEW’20,

us to compare and contrast the types of refactoring operations ap-to test code having issues that are not usually found in production plied in these different contexts. Our study also identifies the type of refactoring operations that are eventually applied specifically to smelly test files, and whether their application the removal of these smell instances.

**1.1 Goal**and Research Questions The goal of this paper is to understand refactoring changes and their effect on test smells. The results of this paper will serve to better understand how refactoring activities influence the stability of test smells (e.g., whether they increase or decrease in frequency) and ultimately recommend refactorings to remove (or at least avoid adding) additional test smells. Hence, we first explore the refactoring activities of Android app developers; more specifically, we target the test suite of apps. Therefore, our study aims at answering the following research questions: **RQ****: What types of refactoring operations are applied to**1 **unit test files compared to non-test files?** tion looks into the type of refactoring operations applied by devel- opers to test and non-test files. We want to know if developers treat test files differently from non-test activities.Knowing if there are differences in how developers refac- tor these two types of files will help us to better tailor our research methodology. **RQ****: What types of refactoring operations are frequently**2 **applied to smelly test files?**With this question, we aim to under- stand what types of refactorings tend to co-occur with a test smell. This researchquestionwillhelp between refactoring operations and test smells. **RQ****: What kinds of refactorings are typically used to re-**3 **move test smells?**It is generally known that refactoring of source code is the mechanism to eliminate smells. From this question, we aim to understand the types of refactoring operations that are in- volved in the removal of test smells from the test suite. Findings from this research question will help us better focus our selecting refactoring operations that improve the maintainability of test suites.

**1.2 Study**Contributions From this study, our main contributions to the field can be summa- rized as follows:

An understanding and listing of refactoring operations ap-(1) plied to test suites of Android apps;

(2)Insightsinto the relationships that exist between refactoring operationsand test smells in the test suites of Android apps;

(3)A comprehensive dataset for replication and extension pur- poses, available on our project website [2].

**2 RELATED**WORK While thereis anampleamount smells, our related work is limited to studies that included aspects of test code refactoring in the study of test smells. van Deursen et al.53[ ] introduced the concept of test smells as a result of studying refactoring of test code. The authors observed that refactoring of test code is different from production code due

is responsible

the relationship

This research ques-

when it comes to refactoring

usidentifydeveloper

ofexistingstudies

code and hence requiringspecialhandling.In52[ van Deursen and Moonenproposedthe conceptof test first refactoring.This forapproach calls for the analysis of the test code in order to identify refactoring opportunities in the production code. Additionally, the authors also proposeda taxonomyof refactoringoperationsfor test code. An approach to safely refactor test code was proposed by Guerra and Fernandes []. The authors utilize graphical notationbetween to representelementswithin a test suite along with a catalogof 15 testcodespecificrefactoringsto helpdevelopersunderstand test code refactoringsand also performmore safely. Meszaros [35], provided developers with patterns and practices on how to write maintainable tests. The author also highlighted smells that are exclusive to test code along with instructionson how to refactor such test cases. In [ 38], Palomba and Zaidman investigated the impact of refac- toring on flaky tests. Flaky tests arethat can exhibit failing and passing results with the same code. Through their study, the au- thors observed that flaky tests are prevalent in systems with around 45% of test methods exhibiting a form of flakiness. The authors also report that refactoring actions performed on the test code help in resolving a majority of flaky tests. In addition to developing a test smell detection tool, TestHound, Greiler et al.27 [ also looked into the types of refactoringthat can be applied to correct the smelly test code. Focusing on test fixture based smells, Greiler et28al.][ investigated the evolution of the smell throughout the lifetime of the project along with providing strategies and recommendations for avoiding and correcting such smells. To better support develop-patterns ers in understanding the structure of their test suite with relation to test smells, Breugelmans and Van Rompaey implemented a tool called TestQ []. Byprovidingavisualizationofthetestsuite, developers will be able to detect refactoringopportunitieseasily and faster. Bavotaet al. [] studied the impact of test smells with regards to code comprehension. In their study, the authors refactored smellyon test codetoremovethetestsmell.Theauthorsreportthatpar- ticipants in their study reporteda negative code comprehension experience when performing maintenance activities on the smelly code. A developer survey conductedby Tufano et al.].[was interesting to note that the participants of the survey did not per- ceive test smells as problematic. Additionally, the participants were of the view that refactoringof the smelly test code would not be advantageous to the design of the test suite. A study on developer reactionsto test smells was conducted by Schvarcbacher et47al.]. [ In this study, the authors integratethe same test smell detection tool used in our study into a code quality monitoring system. Pre- liminary resultsfromtheirstudyshowedthatwhiledevelopers agree that the smells are problematic, they prefer to refactor their test suites only to correct a select set of the smell types. Finally, as our study focuses on Android apps, we looked into studies that investigatedthe refactoringof such systems. We ob- aroundtestserved that the majorityof thedo not focuson granular source code refactoringoperations.Instead,the work mostlyre- volves aroundAPIlevel refactoring.In otherwords,the studies looked at mechanisms to improve the quality characteristics of the apps (such as energy efficiency, concurrency, etc.) by recommending alternate API’s or design patterns ([16, 20, 30, 33, 34, 55]).

351


---

<!-- Página 3 -->

An

**Table 1: Summary of the different test smell types exhibited by files contained in the dataset [42] used in our study.**

**Test**

Assertion Conditional Constructor Default‘ExampleUnitTest’or‘ExampleInstrumentedTest’ Duplicate Eager Empty Exception GeneralsetUp method Ignored@Ignoretheannotation Lazy Magic Mystery Redundantor printlnor printf orwrite methodSystemclass Redundant ResourceFileclassexists(),isFile()ornotExists()methods SensitivetoString()method SleepyThread.sleep() method Unknown@Test(expected)annotation

From a refactoring operation perspective, Park et al.][ refactoring operationson sourcecodeto investigateif the oper- ations help with the energy consumptionof mobile devices. The authors observed that only a partial set of refactoring operations help conserve energy; these findings were later extended by Sahin et al. [] in the context of an empirical study on the impact of the Fowler’srefactoring actions []. Later, Palomba et al.36[] focused on refactoring operations specifically designed to remove Android- specific code smells. They reported thati ) methods of mobile apps affected by energy-specific code smells consume notably more than methods not affected by any design problem andii ) the(refactor- ing operations associated to these smells can increase the energy efficiency of mobile applications in most cases. In a preliminary study of refactoring operations occurring in An- **Figure 1: Overview of our methodology.**droid apps, Peruma [], observed that rename operations are the most common type of refactoring applied to source code. Further- more, by studying the commit log messages, the author observed in the analysis of 1,187,055unit test methods.Table 1 provides a that app developers perform refactorings to improve code readabil- summary of the typesof test smellsthatare partof the dataset. ity,fix defects, and enhance system design. Please refer to [42] for a more detailed definition of these smells. Weutilized the tool, RefactoringMiner50[to detect the different

### 3 METHODOLOGY

refactoringoperations applied by developers to the source code. To The general methodology of our study is depicted in Figure 1, anddetect refactoring operations, RefactoringMiner enumerates over consists of utilizing a mining tool for the detection of refactoringthe entire commit history of a project and compares the changes operations from an existing dataset of unit test files and smells inmade to the source code. Using a pre-defined set of refactoring rules, Android apps.RefactoringMinerchecks if the changes made to the source file can We utilizedthe dataset of Android test smells generatedfrombe categorizedas a refactoring.The version of RefactoringMiner our previousstudy42 ] fortheexperimentsinthisstudy.Theutilized for thiscan detect 39 types of refactoring operations. datasetcontains details of 19 different types of test smells that wereWeexecuted RefactoringMiner on the set of apps contained in our prevalent in the Junit-based unit test files of 656 open-source An- datasetof test smells. In total, we detected 614 apps that underwent droid apps. The dataset captures the types of test smells that occurrefactorings. After the removal of outliers (via the Tukey Fences throughoutthe history of each unit test filethe lifetimeapproach[ 31 ]), each app, exhibited on average 321.4 refactoring op- of the project. In addition to test files, the dataset also contains theerations.A statistical summary of these results is provided in Table production file associated with the test file (where applicable). In2. It is important to highlight that the selection of RefactoringMiner total, 206,598 JUnit based unit test files were processed and resulted wason two observations: on the one hand, it represents state

352

# D

# e t

# e c t

# i

# o n

# o f

#

# D

# a t

# a s e t

#

# o f

#

# r

# e f

# a c t

# o r

# i

# n g

# D

# a t

# a s e t

#

# o f

# t

# e s t

#

# f

# i

# l

# e s

# &

#

# o p e r

# a t

# i

# o n s

# u s i

# n g

# r

# e f

# a c t

# o r

# i

# n g

# s m

# e l

# l

# s

# i

# n

# R

# e f

# a c t

# o r

# i

# n g M

# i

# n e r

# o p e r

# a t

# i

# o n s

# A

# n d r

# o i

# d

# a p p s

# A

# n a l

# y s i

# s

# o f

#

# r

# e s u l

# t

# s

#


---

<!-- Página 4 -->

ICSEW’20,

**Table 2: Statistical summary of refactoring operations asso-**4: Refactoringapplied to test files. **ciated with each app in the dataset.**

**Refactoring Operation Count**Percentage **Min. 1st**Qu. MedianMean3rdQu. Max. Rename Method 1,51119.81% 1 33139321.44661673Change Variable Type 1,45219.03% Rename Variable 80310.53% Change Attribute Type 77310.13% **Table 3: Statistical summary of refactoring operations asso-**Extract Method 4265.58% **ciated with each app for test and non-test files.**Other Operations2,664 34.29% **Total**7,629 100% **Min. 1st**Qu. MedianMean3rdQu. Max. Refactorings applied to test files For our comparison with non-test files, we looked at the remain-1 2713.991971 ing set of source files in the dataset that underwent a refactoring.Refactorings applied to non-test All 39 refactoring operationsthat were supportedby the version1 146.5439.5743.81161.23278.0 of RefactoringMiner used in this study were detected in this set of sourcecode files. Interestingly, we observed thatMoveClass was the most popular refactoring operation for Android developers, occur- of the art in the fieldof refactoringdetection54 ];[the other ring 13.33% of the time. However, unlike the test files, the top five hand, its empirical validation50[ ] showed that the tool is able to refactorings only accounted for 42.35% of the refactorings. Again, reconstructrefactoring operations with an F-Measure close to 93%, looking at the clustering of rename and type change refactorings, hence beingparticularlysuitableinthecontextofa large-scale we observed that 28.94% of the refactorings were clustered under mining investigations like the ours. renames, while 27.93% of refactorings were changes to the type of the identifier. The remaining refactorings accounted for 43.13% of **4 EXPERIMENTAL**RESULTS the operations performed by developers. Additionally, we observed From the 614 apps that underwent refactorings, only 250 apps con-that four out of the top five test file based refactoring operations tained test files that underwent a refactoring. In total, we observedare related to methods or identifiers contained within methods. For that only4,709of testfilesthatwerepartof the250appswerenon-test files, only three of the top five refactorings are related to refactoredby developers. For the 250 apps that do contain test files,methods, while the remaining are at the class-level. we looked at the distribution of refactorings occurring in these testInterestingly,for test files, if we exclusively look at refactorings files. As shownin Table 3, afterthe removalof outliers(via theapplied to methods and classes, we notice that approximately 8.02% TukeyFences approach []), on average, each app had 13.99 refac-of theserefactoringsare appliedto classeswhiletheremaining toring operations performed on test files. However, the average for91.98% of operationsare appliedto methods.Whenit comesto the same set of apps based on the refactorings applied to non-testnon-test files,the distributionis different- methodrefactorings files is much larger. Goingforward,our experimentswill utilizeaccount to 49.27%, with 50.73% of the operations related to classes. these 250 apps to answer our research questions.Finally, the entire list of refactoringoperationsapplied to test and non-test files are available on our project website [2]. **4.1 RQ****: What types of refactoring operations**1 **Summary. We**have shown that the types of refactorings**are applied to unit test files compared to** applied to test and non-test files in Android apps are dif-**non-test files?** ferent.Non-test files are subject to more design level types In total, we detected34 differenttypes of refactoringoperations of refactorings(e.g.,Move Class), while test files tend to that developers apply to test files. The most common typeRenameis undergomore renames (e.g.,RenameMethod,Vari- Method, which occurs approximately 19.81% over the total number able ) and data type changes(e.g.,Change Variable Type) of applied refactorings in the dataset. Due to space constraints, we to identifiers.Furthermore,intestfiles,developersap- present the top five occurringrefactoringoperationsin Table 4. ply more refactorings to methods or other identifiers part However,it is interesting to note that these five operations account of/contained within methods than to classes or attributes. for almost 65% of the operations applied by developers. Furthermore, the majorityoftherefactoringoperationsareclusteredaround data type changes and identifier renames. Approximately38.84% **4.2 RQ****: What types of refactoring operations**2of operations are renames, while type changes account for 34.87%; **are frequently applied to smelly test files?**the remaining operations account for 26.29%. The high occurrence of renamesisnotsurprising,aspriorresearchhasshownthatTo answer thisquestion,we extractedthe list of smelly renamesare one of the most common types of refactorings appliedtest files from the original dataset and then compared the results by developers to source code43[– 45 , 54]. However, other than forto the datasetof refactoringoperations.We observedthat 4,589 API migration-related studies, at present, research on type changetest files that had one or more smells had undergone a refactoring. refactorings are not yet available.Tounderstand the types ofthat tend to co-occur with

353


---

<!-- Página 5 -->

An

**Table 5: Refactoring operations applied to non-test files.**6:Frequentlyco-occurringtestsmellsandrefactor- **ings.**

**Refactoring Operation Count**Percentage **Co-occurring** **Count**Move Class 23,18013.33% **Refactoring** **Smell**Change Parameter Type 14,1788.15%**Operation** Change Attribute Type 12,9217.43% 141Rename Method 12,0746.94%Assertion53.01% (Total: Rename Parameter 11,2996.50% 14 Eager42.42%Other Operations100,249 57.65% (Total: **Total**173,901 100%20 Lazy30.30% (Total: 8 General38.10% (Total:a smellytest file, we first extractedtest files that exhibitedonly 9one type of smell and then lookedat the refactoringsappliedtoRedundant29.03% (Total:the file (if any). Due to space constraints, we present only a few of the results; the complete listing is available on our project website. Table 6 shows the frequencyof co-occurrenceof a subset of test **4.3 RQ****: What kinds of refactorings are**smells and refactoring operations.3 Looking at test files that exhibit theAssertionRoulette smell, we**typically used to remove test smells?** see the majority of refactoring operations performed by developersToanswer this question, we looked at the lifetime history for each are related to a change in the data type of a variable within a methodsmelly test file. For each commit instance of such a file, we compared (i.e., Change Variable Type). Interestingly, theExtract Method refac-if the total smells exhibited by the file reduced and the amount by toring frequently co-occurs withLazy Test and Eager Test smells.which it reduced.Next,we lookedat the refactoringoperations Both these smells are due to developers violating testing best prac-applied by the developer on the instance of the file that showed a tices when calling methods in the production class/file.Eager Testreduction in smell count. From the dataset, we observed that 481 is due to developers exercising multiple production methods in asmelly test files that showed a reduction in smells also underwent a single test method, whileLazy Test is when multiple test methodsrefactoring.On average, we observed that smells exhibited in a test invoke thesameproductionmethod.Mostlikely, thedeveloperfile tend to reduce by 1.30 smells when the file is refactored. These performs extensive design-related changes to the production code,same files, on average, exhibited around 2.98 test smells. Next, we which results in similar changes to the test suite.looked at the numberof refactoringoperationsappliedto these Another interestingfindingis the co-occurrenceof the smelltest files. On average, 2.12 refactoring operations are applied to a General Fixturewith the refactoringoperationChange Attributesmelly test file that results in a reduction in the smell count of the Type . This particular smell arises when the test case fixture is toosame file. Table 7 shows a statistical summary. general, and the test methodsonly accesspart of it. Hencea de-Wealso looked at the different combinations of smell reductions veloper, performing a type change to an attribute in the same testand refactoring operations applied to a smelly file. We observed that suite, should be mindful that there is a possibility of the attributethat the most frequent combinationis the applicationof a single contributingto the emission ofGeneralaFixture smell, if the samerefactoringoperation that would cause a single reduction of a smell attribute is utilized in thesetUp()method and notby alltype. This particular combinationoccurs 38.46% of the time. The test methods in the file. Looking at the smellRedundant Assertion,next highest combination, at 12.89%, is the reduction of one smell we see thatMove Methodis a frequent refactoring operation thattype through the application of two refactoring operations. co-occurs with this smell.Redundant Assertion is caused when testFor the single smell reduction,refactoring combination, methods contain assertion statements that are either always trueas shown in Table 8, we observedthat the refactoringoperation or false. This smell is mostly introduced due to mistakes made byChange Variable Type is frequently involved in commits that also the developer. AMove Method can be thought of as a design-levelshow a reduction in smell counts. Furthermore, from Table 9, the related refactoringandwouldmostlikelybemorecomplicatedsmellEager Testis frequentlyresolvedby developerswhenper- to performgiven the decisionsa developerwould need to make.forming a single refactoring operation. Hence, there is a likely chance of developers forgetting to removeDue to space constraints,we report on a select set of observa- debugging relatedcode such as those that result in ations of the commitsthat were involvedin a singlesmell reduc- Assertion smell when implementing and verifying theMoveMethodtion, single refactoring combination. With regards to theTest refactoring.smell, when we look at commit3 ],[ we observed that the method testHumanDistance()was exhibiting anEager Testsmell as this **Summary. We**observed that there exist certain test smellsmethod was accessing a productionmore than once. Due and refactoringoperationsthat co-occurfrequently. Forto a design-relatedchange(i.e., “move...codeto own class”),the instance, the smellsLazy Testand Eager Testfrequentlydeveloper eliminates this smell from the test file by performing a co-occur with anExtract Method refactoring operation.Move Methodon the smelly test method.In another instance4 ], [ the developer corrects anEager Test smell by performing a

354


---

<!-- Página 6 -->

ICSEW’20,

**Table 7: Statistical summary of smell reductions and refac-**Variable Type. This action was performed by the developer to “fix **toring operations**associatedwitheachrefactoredsmellyunit test” in which a method associated with the new variable type, **file.**in the test method, is utilized instead of a method associated with the production object. **Min. 1st**Qu. MedianMean3rdQu. Max.Looking at theAssertion Roulettesmell, in commit[ ], the de- Amount of smells reduced in smelly fileveloper performsa Change Variable Typeon an objectthatwas 1 111.3023being usedinanassertionmethodthatlackedanexplanation Amount ofoperations applied to smelly filemessage. This refactoringaction, performedby the developerto 1 112.1238address “...lintrecommendations”,resultedinthedeveloperre- moving thesmellyassertionmethodfromthetestmethod.We also observeda Rename Methodalso utilizedtoresolveanAs- be removed or if the refactoring operation resulted in the developersertion Roulettesmell aspartofabugfix.Incommit6 ], we being forcedto removethe statementto avoida compilationorobserved thatthedeveloperrenamestestmethodstobemore runtime error.specific intheirbehavior(e.g.,shouldSanitizeInputDatato Lookingat commit [], we see that even thoughRenameVariableshouldSanitizeInputDataEmail) and, as a result, removes asser- co-occurs with the removal of the smellConstructor Initialization ,tion statements that do not reflect the behavior associated with the the refactoring operation does not contribute to the removal of thename of the test method. smell. From the code and commit message, we see that the refactor-Wealso noticed that the occurrence ofMethod with the ing operation is more to do with adhering to coding standards whileremovalof the smellConditionalTest Logicis popular in our dataset. the smell removal is due to the test being “Upgrade(d) test to JUnitIn [ 7 , 8], we see developers extracting code containing a loop out 4.”In commit[], we observedthat the smellGeneral Fixtureisof a test method.Lookingat the messagesassociatedwith these removedwhen aMove Attributeoperationis applied to the file. Ontwo commits,we are made to understandthat the code changes observation of the code, we see that the refactoring operation didweremade as part of either a change to or addition of functionality. indeed resolve the smell as the attribute that was moved was beingIn other words, the developers to do not explicitly state that their utilized withinthe testfixturemethod,butnotall testmethodsgoal is to resolve the smell (or improve code comprehension). were using it; hence, the existence of the smell.The use ofRenameMethod helps alleviate the smellUnknownTest. From this RQ, we have seen that there exist scenarios where aIn [ 9 ], the developer renames the test method to reflect its purpose test smell is eliminated when a refactoring operation is applied to abetter (testGetCustomFields to texttttestGetNullCustomFields) test file. On the surface, one might assume that developers performand includes an assertion statement to this effect. 10In],[de- refactoring operationstofixsmellycode.However, onanalysisveloper hasa testmethod,testComplete, withoutanassertion of the code, this is not entirely true. As an exploratory study, ourstatement. By default, JUnit considers methods that start with the findings inthisresearchquestionshowsthatmoreisterm ‘’test’ as a test method and would automatically execute the needed in this area. We have shown that refactorings do play a partmethod when the test suite is run. However, looking at the commit in correcting smelly code in test files; however, more in-depth, andmessage, we see that the developer never intended this method to developer supported, studies are needed to fully understand howbe a test method and after realizing that, “the name ‘testComplete’ refactorings can be exclusively utilized to fix smelly code.will cause test runner to actually execute it as a test case, which is not the intention” renamed the method to. **Summary. Despite their**low frequency, there exist sce- Wehave also seen the use ofAttribute Typeinvolved in narios where refactoring operations are utilized to correct the indirect removal of certain smell types. For example in commit a test smell. However, these refactorings are applied by de- [ 11 ], by applying aAttribute Typeoperation, the developer velopersfor reasons other than for the correction of smells; eliminates the Magic Number Testsmell from a test method. How- the fixing of smells is merely a byproduct. At most, a single ever, lookingat thecode,it seemsthatthisco-occurrenceis by smell is corrected by the application of a single refactoring chance; the replacement of magic numbers with constants is most withChangeVariable Typebeing one of the most common likely due to adhering to coding standards to improve code compre- refactorings applied when a smell is removed. hension. A similar pattern is seen in commit12 ].[ In this example, the smellIgnored Testis removedin thesamecommitin which the developer applies the same refactoring operation. However, a **5 DISCUSSION**& FUTUREDIRECTIONreview of the code and commit messageshows that resolvingof this code is not related to refactoring operation. In another exam- RQshowed us that developers treat test and non-test files differ-1 ple, commit[] showsa co-occurrencewith the eliminationofently with regards to refactoring operations. For instance, non-test the smellRedundant Printand the refactoringoperationReplacefiles undergo more design/structure level types of refactorings, un- VariableWith Attribute. However, looking at the code and commitlike test files that are limited to somewhat cosmetic updates such message, we see that while the smell is indeedremoved, it is de-as renames and type changes. Such findings should not be entirely batable if the refactoring operation was solely responsible for thesurprising as test cases (i.e., test methods) are meant to exercise a removal. As the main purpose of the commit was to fix a defectiveminimal unit of source code and, therefore, would mostly require test, it is not possible to determine if the developer determined thatchangesto data types and identifier names to match the new design the print statement in the test method was redundant and needed tolevel changes implemented in the non-test files. The high volume

355


---

<!-- Página 7 -->

An

**Table 8: Top five refactoring operations that co-occur with** **the reduction of a single smell.**

**Refactoring Operation Count**Percentage

Change Variable Type 6535.14% Rename Method 3418.38% Change Attribute Type 147.57% Extract Method 147.57% Move Method 137.03% Other Operations45 24.32% **Total**185 100%

**Table 9: Top five smell types that are eliminated when a sin-aware of the type of refactoring that they will be undertaking on** **gle refactoring is applied to a commit.**

**Smell Type Count**Percentage

Eager Test 7138.38% General Fixture 168.65% Lazy Test 137.03% Magic Number Test 137.03% Conditional Test Logic 126.49% Other Operations60 32.43% **Total**185 100%

of refactoringsbeing appliedto methodswithin test files should not be surprising as methods are the key components in a test suite. From these findings, developers would now be better prepared to understand thelevelofreworkthatwouldbeinvolved comes to refactoring (non-)test files and hence aide in better project estimationplanning. Future work in this direction can lead to more specialized refactoring tools for test and non-test source code. In**RQ**, weexploredtheco-occurrenceofrefactorings2 smells. Our findingsshowed interestingpatterns,such as a high co-occurrence between method based refactorings and test smells. Based on the phenomenon that most refactorings are applied to test methods, developersshould focus on test smells being exhibited by the methods they are refactoring. From our findings, we envi- sion that app developers are now better prepared when refactoring test files with regards to smells. Developerswill be aware of the most likely smell that exists or being introduced into the test suite when performing a refactoring. Taking this step further, researchers and/or tool vendors can be better equipped to offer an automated resolving of smells when a developer applies a specific refactoring to a test. While a previous study42[ ] has shown that the volume of smells exhibited by a test file tends to remain steady over the lifetime of the file, fromRQ—thoughlow in volume—we observed situations3 wheredevelopers resolve smells exhibited by test files. Even though refactoringis supposed to remove smells, not all developers refactor their code with the aim of smell removal; the removal is mostly as a result of a byproductof refactoringthe test suite. Research Tufano et al. [] and Peruma et al.42[] showed that not all devel- opers perceive all test smells as problematic. Hence, the refactoring operationsperformed on test files are mostly related to other types

of developmentactivitiessuchas fixingissues,adheringto cod- ing standards, and incorporating new/updated functionality. Even thoughwe did notice patterns such asMethod resolvingthe ConditionalTest Logicsmell, more research is needed into this area, especially with developerinvolvement,to identifyfalse-positive patternsand explore the developer’s intention on proactively fixing smells with refactoring operations.

**6 THREATS**TO VALIDITY A critical threat to this study is the domain for this study. This is singularly focused on Android apps and may not be representative of non-mobilesystems.However, given the volumeof apps and ease of app development, it is important for app developers to be

their app during maintenanceactivities. Furthermore,as the test files are JUnit based, non-mobile developers (and researchers) can use our findings as a starting point when maintaining the test suite of non-mobile systems. The original dataset can also be considered as a threat. However, the dataset has been used in a prior, published study on Android test suites [42]. Furthermore, at present, there does not exist any other datasets that focus on the test suite of Android apps. Additionally, the smell detection tool used to construct the dataset has also been utilized in anotherstudyon test smells47[ Thecorrectnessof RefactoringMiner in theidentificationof refactoringoperations is also a threat to this study. However, prior studies48 , 50[ ] have shown that RefactoringMiner has high precision and recall scores when compared to similar open-source tools. Finally,it is worth remarking that the conclusions drawn in our study are based on statistical data and co-occurrence analysis. As whenitsuch, our study should be considered as a preliminary investigation into thewaymobiledevelopersperformoperations. Hence, our findings should be complemented with further insights in order to shed light on the rationale pushing developers to perform andsuch operations on test files, or when tests are affected by design issues. This kind of analysis is already part of our future research.

**7 CONCLUSION**& FUTUREWORK In this study, we explored the refactoring operations applied by An- droid app developers on their apps. We utilized an existing dataset of open-sourceapptestfiles,andtestsmellsforourstudy. Ad- ditionally, we usedRefactoringMinerto identifythe refactoring operations in the dataset. Our analysis of 250 projects showed us that app developers apply a different set of refactorings to test and non-testsource code files. Furthermore, we presented the common refactorings that co-occur with test smells, and finally, we looked at the smells that are resolved when a test file is refactored. Going forward, our future work in this area will involve a more deep-diveinto a select set of refactoring operations (i.e., that were frequentlyappliedby developers)to test files. Additionally,we will also be looking at the type (i.e., experience) of developers that apply these types of refactorings and the specific reasons pushing them to apply certain refactoring operations. by **REFERENCES** [1][n.d.]. applications-in-the-google-play-store/.

356


---

<!-- Página 8 -->

ICSEW’20,

[2]20th(Cary, [3][n.d.].North(FSE. Association d2ce8bcdab02bf8d70b96dc0e8956c1b.[33]Y. [4][n.d.].Programming2015 17c72e4451fe562348f9c2a55fd0b257.Software. 224–235. [5][34][n.d.].Ivano 37574423bd41b688fe5ef4f3ecaacc44.Patricia2018 [6][n.d.].IEEE. 22a08f2f0c231024bf25a4da696a40ef.[35]G.xUnit. Pearson [7][n.d.].[36]Fabio fb8ec323f48634266fb37e91894eb5c7.De [8][n.d.].mobileInformation105 84ded72#diff-8380d0cb5481ea67fa154bd13572ebe3.[37]Fabio [9][n.d.].iliano 9c9691a#diff-ec439e6e6d7cb33ad174cd3e5b6da9bd.userJournal [10][n.d.].Software 137 [38]commit/0622f96#diff-5feae667a2375978cec3bc0cfc9efd3b.F. [11][n.d.].Flaky2017 6193986e47a81e5e53e7f13906c54095.Evolution. 1–12. [12][n.d.].[39]Fabio a860a9085797f69ceab90031a94ff63f.betweenEmpirical(Oct [13][n.d.].[40]Jae 21b786b93511440d8bfc28d560b58b88.Power. 717–722. [14][n.d.].[41]A.2019 diff-fc2ee68efe30e2b8ae06036781654774.6th [15][n.d.].BILESoft) . 148–149. d7a31ea4c55bae472368bccf882e4e0a.[42]Anthony [16]AbhijeetMkaouer, ofinProceedingsIn tional(Austin,of (MOBILESoft. AssociationEngineering (Toronto,(CASCON. IBM Gabriele[43]Anthony[17] Binkley.EmpiricalNewman. Software20,Messages,Journal([n. [18]Manuel[44]Anthony andINIn.Newman. [19]SuelennameProceedings and(Montpellier,(IWoR. Association presentationEmpirical24,York, [20]Luis[45]A. EnergyProceedingstualizing2019 of19th (Buenos(MOBILESoft. IEEE(SCAM). 74–85. [21]Dario[46]Cagri man,affectProceedings apps:2017on. 1–10. software. IEEE,[47]Martin [22]BarrettInvestigating Pourangprogress.2019 source2014Evolution,. Visualization . IEEE,[48]Danilo [23]MartinRefactoring:. Addison-tor?Proceedings WesleySIGSOFT(Seattle, [24]GiovanniWA,(FSE. Association Harald[49]D. testing2018the2018 Software. IEEE,Conference. 1–12. [25]Giovanni[50]Nikolaos Gall.and automaticallyJournal156History.Proceedings [26]Giovanni(Gothenburg,(ICSE. Association ofIEEE[51]Michele on(2019).Oliveto, [27]M.tigation Fixture2013International(Singapore, Software. 322–331.pore)(ASE. Association [28]M.[52]Arie avoidingrefactoringProc. Conference. 387–396.Processes. Citeseer, [29][53]E.Interna-Arie tional. 44–44.RefactoringProceedings G.programming. 92–95.[30] [54]in2015Carmine Engineering. 148–149.Bacchelli. A.R.Probability,. TayloropenScience180[31] Francis.[55]Ying [32]Miryungang StudyOffloading. SIGPLAN47,

357


---

